asta yikàki ṭàṭi
"There was a fallah"

ašte wašīs dī gōrwi.
"he had two oxen"

ʕamma dʕràri bītas atsunta.
"He was ploughing on them"

štirda min hnōnà gōrwak, ṭlifra.
"An ox arose from there, and got free"

mandōsis ṭàṭ, rawàḥra kuriista.
"The fellah left him (the ox), went to his house"

qāl: sabàḥtan laherdōmur, yà ŭhŭ gōrū ē deryama, mardōmur ē čiryama.
"He said "In the morning if I see thee, oh thou ox, in this place, I will slay thee with this knife.""

gōrū mīnda ḥàlos, ràura. làherda ēgasas illi kildēk. 
"The ox betook himself and went. He saw long grass."

wēsra, qàra mindžīs.
"he stayed, ate of it."

ara abūskara abū ḥasan.
"There came to him Abu Ḥasan"

mīnda ḥàlos abū ḥasan, čirda abŭskara
"Abu Ḥasan betook himself"

čirda abŭskara:
"he (Abu Ḥasan) said to himː"

hàdi gōrū, wēsrūr erhēnà?
"Why do you stay here?"

ihi deri nimras derik; sa'a àuari, fēri, bagari dlàʕur
"This is a panther's place, the hour she comes she will strike and break thy ribs"

minda ḥàlos u gara abu ḥasan nimraskara
"Abu Ḥasan betook himself and went to the panther."

čirda abuska: hàdi gōrwi qara ḥaštširma.
"He said "This ox has eaten in thy grass""

čarīra abŭ ḥasan,
"Abu Ḥasan was hidden"

ara abuska nimr.
"the panther came to him."

: kēka, gōrū, wēsrūri ērabiʕēmà?
"he said "Why, oh though Ox, dost thou stay in this spring-grass""

: sàuiōm ḥirt-kera amàtà
""My master ploughs on me,"

u mūṭlif hrōmi min kullēki, 
"and I am weary from hunger"

(u) laherdōm ihi derya. durt qàmi mindžīs
"I saw this place and wished to eat in it."

u hà ama bēn xasturki hrōmi.
"and I am between thy hands.""

wēsra, mandōsis gōru des dīs, 
"He stayed, left the ox ten days"

tillà-ḥra qàdd dawàiiki. 
"it became as big as a camel"

ara abŭskara abū ḥasan;
"Then came to him Abu Ḥasan"

qàl gōrū: kirwi?
"the ox said "what is the matter?""

abu ḥasan qàl, 
"Abu Ḥasan said,"

nimr mandōsri ēderiēma ta-ʕàdel-hōči
""The panther has left thee in this place till thou become fat"

u bàʕdēn
"and aferwards"

fēri qafisma,
"she will strike thee with her paw"

marēk u qari.
"thou will die and she will eat thee."

ārōsir nimr... luḥra-ker ikīr abus.
"If the panther comes to thee, redden thy eye upon her"

u fumnēs qurnūrmà
"and strike her with your horn (to kill her)""

mīnda ḥàlōs abū ḥasan, gara nimrkara, qàl
"Abu Ḥasan betook himself, went to the panther, said"

atū mandōr gōrwi rabiʕēma;
""Thou hast left the ox in the spring-grass;"

džà, laham galna-ker wašīs.
"go, let me see [thee] speak with him.""

qàl: kēi iḥra?
"Said she "what has happened?""

abu hasan qàl: dràra-ḥra gōrū
"Said Abu Ḥasan "The ox has become fat,"

li-laherdōsir ɣàir in mararir.
"so that if he sees you he will want to kill you""

mīnda ḥàlos nimr, u xuldà gōràta
"The panther went down to the ox,"

gōrū ɣaz-kerda qurnōsma
"the ox thrust his horn (into the ground)"

u fērōsis qurnōsma
"and struck him"

u stuhḥ-kerda nimros. 
"and split him into two pieces."

feros nimr gēna ẃinni stuḥ-kerdōsi. 
"The panther struck him also and split him."

minde ḥàlōsan diyēni, mre, gōrū u nimr.
"The two betook themselves and died, the ox and the panther."

štirda min hnōna abū ḥasan, gara qarà diyēnimma.
"Abu Ḥasan arose from there, went to eat the two."

nàdi-kerda bàiis u potres
"He called his wife and children,"

qare wašīs. 
"they ate with him."

lamma nī manda diyēnànki ɣàir xàre,
"[until] there remained nothing of the two but bones."

àbu ḥàsàn
"abu ḥasan"

nàdi-kerda qàumēs giš. qàrw xàran, mīnde ḥàlēsan u gare. 
"called his people (to eat the bones)"

nàura abū ḥasan, laherda fŭrwēk
"Abu Ḥasan searched, and saw a piece of fur/sheepskin coat"

(u) tirdōsis palēstà. 
"and put the coat on his shoulders."

ningra ēmŭɣarēmà
"He entered a cave,"

laherda bàrūs nimràski mŭɣarēmà.
"saw the brother of the panther in the cave."

mīndōsis nimr, qàl:
"The panther took him and saidː"

àbu ḥasan, kēka mardōr bàrōm?
""Abu Ḥasan, why hast thou slain my brother?""

: ama nī ḥrōmi gōrwi
""I am not the ox" (said by Abu Ḥasan)"

: àtū illi iktōr fasàdi
""It is he who roused the quarrel" (said by Abu Ḥasan)"

laherda nimr fūrwē palēstik;
"The panther saw the sheepskin coat which was on his shoulder."

kàl; : àbū ḥasan, kerēk amàka yikàk miθl àuraki?
"Abu Ḥasan, Wilt though make for me one like that?""

rūdra abū ḥasan : kerami:
"Abu Ḥasan answered him "I will make it"

nan amàka štàr bakra garda,
"fetch me four good sheep,"

marēsan,
"kill them"

ta-keram abŭrkara fūrwek.
"(so) that I may make for thee a sheepskin coat.""

mīnda ḥàlōs nimr, nanda abŭskarà štàr bakra.
"The panther betook himself, brought four sheep to him."

qara màsyan,
"He ate the flesh"

ukta qàlan čàlasma
"and cast the skins."

čàlasma
"in a pit"

ara nimr abŭskara, kàl: kà fūrwē, abū ḥasan?
"The panther came to him and said "Where is the coat, Abu Ḥasan?""

qàl: màngari bakrak gēna.
"He said " there lacks another sheep""

nanda abŭskara nimr bakrak.
"The panther brought him a cheep"

mardosis, qārdosis àbū ḥasan
"Abu Ḥasan killed it,"

( qārdosis )
"ate it"

pàndžī u potrēs,
"he and his children."

ukta qàlas čàlasma. 
"and cast the skin into a pit."

ara abŭskara nimr.
"The panther came to him"

: kà fūrwē, abū hasan?
"he said, "where is the coat, Abu Ḥasan?""

qàl : windir ta-nanamis.
"He said "stay till I bring it""

nasra abū ḥasan 
"Abu Ḥasan fled"

rasrōs nimr
"the panther followed him"

mīnda ḥàlōs, gara, ningari ēmŭɣarēma.
"He betook himself and went, he enters a cave."

mīndōsis nimr dhanabuski;
"He took him by his tail;"

intà-kerda ḥàlōs abū ḥasan, 
"Abu Ḥasan pulled himself (and escaped),"

intà-kerda ḥàlōs abū ḥasan, čnīra dhanabos nimras-xastàsma. 
"his tail was cut in the paw of the panther."

štirda min hnōnà abū ḥasan, manda ʕazar. 
"Abu Ḥasan rose from there and remained tailless."

čirda nimr abuskà, qàl : atū, abu ḥasan ʕazar-ḥrōr, džandōmur.
"The panther said to him, "Thou art tailless, Abu Ḥasan, I will know thee.""

gara min hnōna abū ḥasan,
"Abu Ḥasan went from there,"

rawàḥra nimr.
"the panther departed."

gara ekarmaska, qara ʕanab min mnēšīs. 
"Hent to a vineyard, (ate grapes) from it."

( qarà ʕanab )
"(ate grapes)"

fēra sōṭak, giš džamʕatēs are.
"He gave a shout (and) all of his people came."

: qumnan idrak.
"(he said) "Let us eat grapes""

xlàurdōssan ekarmasma. 
"he made them descend into the vineyard."

qàl: manimraneʔ qumnas ɣàir tam-banim pin-džikēran.
"he said "I will not suffer you to eat unless I bind your tails""

bandōssan abū ḥasan
"Abu Ḥasan bound them"

u ara naṭraskara. 
"and came the watchman."

sawuṭkērdà kanisma.
"He shouted in his ear"

štirda min hnōna ŭhŭ naṭūr fērōssan dfàngma winni
"The watchman rose from there, shot them with a gun"

giš dhanabēsan kànīrēndi
"and all their tails were plucked out."

mīnda ḥàlōs abū ḥasan, gara nimraska;
"Abu Ḥasan betook himself and went to the panther."

qàl: mīndōmir, abū ḥasan.
"He said "I will seize thee, Abu Ḥasan.""

qàl: kà krēk mindžīm, yà zelami?
"He said "Fellow, what dost tthou with me?""

qàl: atu pardōr bakran u qārōssan,
"He said "thou has taken the sheep and eaten them"

nī kerdōr fūrwē amakara.
"and dist not make the sheepskin coat for me""

qàl: ama nī hrōmi.
"he said "It is not I""

qàl: atū hrūri.
"He said "It is thee""

qàl: kēi džanàurdōsir inni ama hrōmi?
"He said "Who told thee that it was I?""

qàl: ama čindōm dhanabūr.
"he said "I cut off thy tail""

qàl: giš džamaʕtēm qàribem ʕasarne.
"He said "All my people, all my near relations, are tailless""

qàl: lahamni: nàdi-kerēsan.
"He said "Let me see, call them""

fēre atsànta sōṭak abū ḥasan,
"Abu Ḥasan shouted to them,"

giš are ; aherdōssan nimr giš ʕazarne. 
"and they all came, the panther saw that they were all tailless."

nī džanda kōnik illi qara bakran. 
"he did not know which was the one who had eaten the sheep"

mīnda ḥàlōs abī ḥàsan, ʔàzim kerda nimras. 
"Abu Ḥasan betook himself and invited the panther"

tīrda ḥassīri čàlas-kapyata abu ḥasan
"Abu Ḥasan put a carpet on the mouth of the well"

wēšlàurda nimras atusta, 
"and caused the panther to sit on it"

winni kuirek čàlas-mandžisma. 
"and hefell into the middle of the well."

ara min hnōnà.
"The panther came from there"

šibra nimr min čàlaski winni
"leapt from the well,"

mīndēk abu-ḥasanas u tīrdōsis čàlasma. 
"siezed Abu Ḥasan and put him in the well."

ḥre diyēni čàlasma. 
"The two were in the well."

mīnda ḥàlōs nimr, dī dīs ibkarwàiànki mrà. 
"In two days the panther died of hunger"

qàra abū ḥasan nimras čàlasma. 
"Abu Ḥasan ate the panther in the well."

ašte kadždžiēni ārendi ta-kunand čmaryan. 
"There were women going to sell chickens."

bardēni slàle. 
"Their baskets were full"

laherde ečalas. 
"They saw that well."

ɣēbri atsànta gam. 
"The sun set on them."

site čàlasta. 
"They slept by the well."

delli-kerde čmàryan čàlasma. 
"They lowered the chickend into the well."

slàurdēndsan čàlasma aratīyōs; 
"They made them sleep in the well that night"

abu ḥàsan nī manda mnēšsan wala čmaryak. 
"Abu Ḥasan did not leave a single chicken of them."

sabàḥtan inšil-kērde kadždžie sellas min čàlaski
"In the morning the women raised the basket from the well."

pàndžī sitek sellasma. 
"he/Abu Ḥasan was sleeping in the basketǃ"

yōmin kilda båra, nasra.
"When he got up outside, he fled"

are kadždžie, rore
"Those women wept"

u gārīre rawàḥre kuriēsanta. 
"and returned, departed to their houses."

mīnda ḥàlōs abū ḥasan, qàl
"Abu Ḥasan betook himself, he said"

ama biddi džàm ḥadždžōčam u tawab-ḥōčam ḥaramta.
""I want to go to the haj and cease from sin""

asta qlàraki, qōldēk dawàiàta, garēk ḥadždžōčàr. 
"There was a bedawi riding a camel, going to the haj."

mīnda abū ḥasan dhanabōs dawàyaki. 
"Abu Ḥasan seized the tail of the camel."

kanindra qlàra, laherddōsis, mīndēk dhanàbōs dawàyaki. 
"The bedawi looked and saw him seizing the tail of the camel."

mīnda ḥàlōs qlàra, pēnda ētirwàli
"The bedawi betook himself, seized the sword,"

u fēra ēfeni abū-ḥasanas winni čindēk dhanabos dawàyak. 
"And struck Abu Ḥasan thus, and cut the tail of his camel."

mīnda ḥàlōs abū-ḥasan u gārīra. 
"Abu Ḥasan betook himself and returned."

laherda ʕasfūri pàndasma sitēk potrēsta. 
"He saw a bird on the way sleeping on its young."

ara min hnōna ta-kumnar potrēs.
"he came from there to eat its chilren"

ni qār potrēm
"Don't eat my childrenǃ"

qàl: xàznàuēm.
"Abu Ḥasan said "Make me laugh""

qàl: kētà?
"She said "At what?""

qàl: ehe ḥassadīnànta.
"He said "At those harvesters.""

qàl: windir ŭnkīir.
"She said "stay where you are""

ari ʕasfūri, windirdi kadždžakas-siryata. 
"The bird came, sat on the head of one of the men."

ara yikàk min hnōna, ara ta-fumnar ʕàsfur mendželma;
"One man came from there, he came to strike the bird with the sickle;"

činda siriōs kadždžaski. 
"he cut off the head of the man."

xazra abū ḥasan, ibsūṭ-ḥra. 
"Abu Ḥasan laughed, he was contented."

dàura potrēs ʕàsfūrik, gàrà qārsanni.
"He rushed on the children of the bird, he went to eat them."

qàl: kēi màngēk?
"She said "What do you want?""

qàl: tirasàlʕ ḥrōmi, màngami pīam
"he said "I am thirsty, I want to drink"

illi kadždžyaki štaldik kupaki pànik.
"that which a woman is carrying in a jug of water.ː""

deridžri agrīs ʕasfūri kàdždžyaki.
"The bird stepped in front of the woman."

tīrdik ikpēs erhōna,
"The woman set down her jugs there,"

u dàuri ta-mīnar ʕasfūri.
"and ran to take the bird."

ara abū ḥasan, pīrēk pàniis giš. 
"Abu Ḥasan came, drank all her water."
